Release Notes 1.5.0 (#204)
percona/everest-doc: docs/release-notes/Percona-Everest-1.5.0-(2025-02-07).md

    |---------|---------------------|---------|
    | **1.**|[RBAC: Integration with IdP groups](#streamlining-role-based-access-control-with-idp-group-integration)|Assign RBAC policies to user groups obtained from an external IdP|
    | **2.**|[Operators support](https://docs.percona.com/everest/release-notes/Percona-Everest-1.4.0-%282025-01-07%29.html#__tabbed_1_4)|Support for PXC operator 1.16.1|
    | **3.**|[New features](https://docs.percona.com/everest/release-notes/Percona-Everest-1.3.0-%282024-11-18%29.html#new-features)|Check out the new features introduced in Percona Everest 1.5.0|
    | **4.**|[Improvements](https://docs.percona.com/everest/release-notes/Percona-Everest-1.3.0-%282024-11-18%29.html#improvements)|Discover all the enhancements featured in Percona Everest 1.5.0|
    | **5.**|[Bugs](https://docs.percona.com/everest/release-notes/Percona-Everest-1.3.0-%282024-11-18%29.html#bugs)|Find out about all the bugs fixed in Percona Everest 1.5.0|
    | **6.**|[Known limitations](https://docs.percona.com/everest/release-notes/Percona-Everest-1.3.0-%282024-11-18%29.html#known-limitations)|Discover all the known limitations in Percona Everest 1.5.0|

> ## Release highlights

Reviewer: Big highlight missing: RBAC GA :tada: :rocket:

Author: Ok. Will add it

### Streamlining Role-Based Access Control with IdP group integration

Starting with Percona Everest 1.5.0, you can now assign RBAC policies to user groups obtained from the external IDP. This enhancement simplifies permissions management for external users without the need for unique **sub** IDs. To use IdP groups in Percona Everest RBAC, you would need to set up the groups claim in your IdP provider configuration.

During the SSO authentication, if the group’s scope is requested but the Identity Provider (IdP) lacks the necessary groups claim configuration or does not support it by default, SSO could fail or not function as expected.

> To retrieve the OIDC groups, you need to include the scope by specifying the following fields:
> 
>     --scopes openid,profile,email,groups

Reviewer: Where? I think we should have the full command here
```suggestion
To retrieve the IdP groups, you need to include the `groups` scope by specifying the following fields:

       everestctl settings oidc configure --issuer-url=http://url.com --client-id=<your-app-client-id --scopes openid,profile,email,groups
```

Take a look at the descriptions of the various fields in the table below:

 **Field**|**Description**|
 |--------|---------------|

>  |`scopes openid`|Grants access to the user’s identity, necessary for OIDC flows to issue an ID token with the unique identifier (subject sub).|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 |`openid`|Grants access to the user’s identity, necessary for OIDC flows to issue an ID token with the unique identifier (subject sub).|
```

  |`profile`|Grants access basic profile information.|
  |`email`|Grants access to the user’s email address and its verification status.|
    |`groups`|Grants access to obtain information about the user’s group memberships.|

To explore further, dive into our [documentation](https://docs.percona.com/everest/administer/Idp_groups_integration.html).

### Operators support

We have added support for PXC operator v1.16.1.

> 

Reviewer 2: I think we're also adding support for new PSMDB operator (1.19.1- the hoy fix we're waiting for), @recharte can you confirm please?

Reviewer: Confirmed.

## New features

- [EVEREST-1547](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1547): After performing an Everest upgrade, you will now receive a notification indicating that the upgrade has been completed. You can then access all the new features by clicking the **Reload** button.

- [EVEREST-1549](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1549): We have added support for PXC operator v1.16.1.

> 

Reviewer 2: If Diogo confirms that we're also adding new Mongo operator we should add it here

Author: Sure

> - [EVEREST-1549](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1549): We have added support for PXC operator v1.16.1.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [EVEREST-1549](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1549): We have added support for PXC operator v1.16.1.

- [EVEREST-1884](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1884): We have added support for PSMDB operator v1.19.1.

```

> - [EVEREST-1605](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1605): Starting with Percona Everest 1.5.0, you have the ability to configure Kubernetes affinity rules for specific database components in the **Advanced Configuration** section of the database creation wizard. This enables you to manage workload distribution across your Kubernetes cluster, optimize resource utilization and boosting the high availability of each component.

Reviewer 2: We do not have affinity in this release, it was pushed de to some change's we're introducing

> - [EVEREST-1606](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1606): You can now configure Kubernetes affinity rules for specific database components in the **Components** tab of an existing database.

Reviewer 2: Affinity is out of scope for 1.5

Author: Fixed

> - [EVEREST-1607](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1607): You can now view the current status of your affinity configuration from the DB Overview tab. From there, you can directly navigate to the Affinity section in the Components tab to modify the rules. This will enable you to monitor and adjust the Kubernetes affinity settings for your database components.

Reviewer 2: Affinity is out of scope for 1.5

Author: Fixed

- [EVEREST-1799](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1799): Starting with Percona Everest 1.5.0, you can now assign RBAC policies to user groups obtained from an external IDP. This change simplifies permissions management for external users without the need for unique **sub** IDs. 

## Improvements

> - [EVEREST-970](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-970): Our default schedule has been updated from **Hourly** to **Daily**, starting at 1:00 AM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [EVEREST-970](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-970): Our default backup schedule has been updated from **Hourly** to **Daily**, starting at 1:00 AM.
```

> - [EVEREST-1066](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1066) \[UI\] Backups \(widget\)

Reviewer 2: I think we're missing description here?

Author: Removed this and added (https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1796) instead as per the comments in the ticket for (https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1066) \[UI\] Backups \(widget\).

> - [EVEREST-1190](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1190): You can now easily find out which account you’re using to log into Everest by clicking the Profile button. This button shows the email ID used to log into Percona Everest.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [EVEREST-1190](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1190): You can now easily find out which account you’re using to log into Everest by clicking the Profile button. This button shows the user's name or email address used to log into Percona Everest.
```

- [EVEREST-1579](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1579): We have enhanced the shard **Topology** by modifying the label from **Nodes** to **Nodes per shard**. This change provides greater clarity on the distribution of nodes across each shard. Additionally, we now display the total number of nodes within the **Database summary** panel, giving you a more complete and insightful overview of your database.

- [EVEREST-1612](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1612): 
The `everestctl version` command has been updated to provide  information about the version of the Everest server that is currently installed on your system, if applicable. This enhancement enables you to easily verify the server version in use.

> - [EVEREST-1718](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1718) \[UI\] Add loading bar when operators are being upgraded

Reviewer: Missing proper description

- [EVEREST-1788](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1788),[EVEREST-1790](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1790): The `everestctl namespaces remove` and `everestctl namespaces update` commands now show a help message that guides you on how to use them.

> - [EVEREST-1794](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1794): We have improved the description of the help text for the `--keep-namespace` flag in the `everestctl namespaces remove` command. Previously, the flag did not clearly explain that it retains the namespace in Kubernetes while only removing `everest-managed` resources, which led to confusion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [EVEREST-1794](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1794): We have improved the description of the help text for the `--keep-namespace` flag in the `everestctl namespaces remove` command. Previously, the flag did not clearly explain that it retains the namespace in Kubernetes while only removing everest-managed resources, which led to confusion.
```

- [EVEREST-1401](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1401):
Now, when you create/edit the database cluster with sharding enabled for PSMDB, it will display the correct resources required for the specified number of shards.

- [EVEREST-1537](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1537):
We have resolved an issue that caused Percona Everest uninstallation to fail when attempting to delete database clusters due to a timeout.

- [EVEREST-1581](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1581): The database remained in a **Deleting** state, despite all components being deleted. The issue has now been resolved.

- [EVEREST-1588](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1588): We have fixed an issue where the PostgreSQL database was stuck in an **initializing** state after a restore.

- [EVEREST-1589](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1589): We have fixed an issue where the MySQL database reamined stuck in an **initializing** state for 1-node cluster.

> - [EVEREST-1590](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1590) Installation is stuck
> 

Reviewer: Let's remove this one
```suggestion
```

> - [EVEREST-1647](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1647): When creating a monthly schedule on day 1 at 12:00 AM (the default option when choosing **Monthly**), it led to an error for PSMDB. The issue has been resolved now.

Reviewer: Well, this is a bit more nuanced than this. Maybe we should say that there's an issue with monthly schedules on day 1 with certain timezones and we added validations to forbid those cases.

- [EVEREST-1674](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1674): The message **Enforce did not pass** appeared randomly in the UI. Additionally, databases in the UI sometimes disappeared and then reappeared after a few seconds. We have now resolved the issue.

- [EVEREST-1724](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1724): Sharding no longer resets to its default setting (disabled) when navigating back in the database creation wizard.

> - [EVEREST-1728](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1728): The database dashboard now updates automatically when you create databases in different namespaces across various browser sessions.

Reviewer 2: I was a bit confused what database dahsboard do you mean here, maybe we should call it database list?

Reviewer: Also, I wouldn't say "when you create databases in different namespaces" because this isn't about "different namespaces" this is about newly created namespaces. If the namespace was created after you refreshed the page you wouldn't see the DBs in that namespace unless you refreshed the page again. We were only fetching the list of namespaces when we refreshed the page so we wouldn't detect new namespaces, now we poll this data so it should always be up-to-date.

Author: Fixed.

> - [EVEREST-1729](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1729): Installation fails if 1.3.0 release cli is used to install 1.4.0

Reviewer: We added a mechanism to prevent a given CLI version to install incompatible everest versions.

- [EVEREST-1735](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1735): We have fixed an issue where incorrect information appeared on the **PITR Edit** button when PITR was enabled.

> - [EVEREST-1758](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1758): The **Create Database** button on the UI was inaccessible until the page was manually refreshed after adding a namespace using the `everestctl namespaces add` command. The issue has been resolved now.

Reviewer: If you want to put this next to EVEREST-1728, it's basically the same root cause.

Author: Added next to it.

- [EVEREST-1800](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1800): We fixed an issue where users could not create a DB cluster because the DB version was not displayed with a specific RBAC policy.

- [EVEREST-1801](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1801): Create DB cluster option was not visible on the UI if user did not have the permissions for all the database engines. The issue has been resolved now.

> - [EVEREST-1802](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1802): Create DB cluster option was not visible on the UI if the user lacked permissions for all database engines. This issue has now been resolved.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [EVEREST-1802](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1802): A given namespace was not visible on the UI if the user lacked permissions for all database engines in that namespace. This issue has now been resolved.
```

- [EVEREST-1803](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1803): 
We have fixed an issue that prevented users from editing or adding monitoring to an existing DB cluster with a specific RBAC policy.

> - [EVEREST-1804](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1804): The Operator Upgrade option was previously not visible on the UI when users had access to all DB clusters in a namespace. This issue has now been resolved.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [EVEREST-1804](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1804): The Operator Upgrade option was previously not visible on the UI when users didn't have access to all DB clusters in a namespace. This issue has now been resolved.
```

- [EVEREST-1801](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1801): The **Create DB cluster** option was not visible on the UI if the user did not have the permissions for all the database engines. The issue has been resolved now.

- [EVEREST-1802](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1802): A given namespace was not visible on the UI if the user lacked permissions for all database engines in that namespace. This issue has now been resolved.

- [EVEREST-1803](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1803): 
We have fixed an issue that prevented users from editing or adding monitoring to an existing DB cluster with a specific RBAC policy.

- [EVEREST-1804](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1804): The Operator Upgrade option was previously not visible on the UI when users didn't have access to all DB clusters in a namespace. This issue has now been resolved.

- [EVEREST-1811](https://perconadev.atlassian.net/browse/EVEREST-1811) The everest-operator now restarts seamlessly when a DB operator is installed for the first time.

## Known limitations

> Operator versions 1.19.0 and 1.19.1 are set with a recommended MongoDB version of 7.0 due to potential issues with point-in-time recovery on MongoDB 8.0 when sharding is enabled, and the Operator version is 1.19.x. Thus, upgrading to Operator 1.19.0 or 1.19.1 is not advisable if you run sharded MongoDB 8.0 clusters.

Reviewer: Since we only support 1.19.1, I suggest to only mention that version. Also, MongoDB version 8 has only been added in this version so the last sentence doesn't make sense.
```suggestion
PSMDB Operator version 1.19.1 added support for MongoDB version 8.0. However, due to potential issues with point-in-time recovery on MongoDB 8.0 when sharding is enabled, the recommended MongoDB version is still 7.0.
```

    | **2.**|[RBAC: Integration with IdP groups](#streamlining-role-based-access-control-with-idp-group-integration)|Assign RBAC policies to user groups obtained from an external IdP|
    | **3.**|[Operators support](https://docs.percona.com/everest/release-notes/Percona-Everest-1.4.0-%282025-01-07%29.html#__tabbed_1_4)|Support for PXC operator 1.16.1 and PSMDB operator 1.19.1|
    | **4.**|[New features](https://docs.percona.com/everest/release-notes/Percona-Everest-1.3.0-%282024-11-18%29.html#new-features)|Check out the new features introduced in Percona Everest 1.5.0|
    | **5.**|[Improvements](https://docs.percona.com/everest/release-notes/Percona-Everest-1.3.0-%282024-11-18%29.html#improvements)|Discover all the enhancements featured in Percona Everest 1.5.0|
    | **6.**|[Bugs](https://docs.percona.com/everest/release-notes/Percona-Everest-1.3.0-%282024-11-18%29.html#bugs)|Find out about all the bugs fixed in Percona Everest 1.5.0|
    | **7.**|[Known limitations](https://docs.percona.com/everest/release-notes/Percona-Everest-1.3.0-%282024-11-18%29.html#known-limitations)|Discover all the known limitations in Percona Everest 1.5.0|

## Release highlights

> ## Role-based access control (RBAC) now Generally Available (GA) in Percona Everest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Role-based access control (RBAC) now Generally Available (GA) in Percona Everest
```

- Enhanced security: Restrict access to authorized users and teams only.

- Better IdP integration: Integrate with your Identity Provider to streamline the authentication process and effectively manage the assignment of user roles.

**Upgrade to Percona Everest today** to unlock RBAC for improved security and streamlined efficiency!

For more insights into RBAC, refer to our [documentation](https://docs.percona.com/everest/administer/rbac.html).

### Streamlining Role-Based Access Control with enhanced IdP group integration

Starting with Percona Everest 1.5.0, you can now assign RBAC policies to user groups obtained from the external IDP. This enhancement simplifies permissions management for external users without the need for unique **sub** IDs. To use IdP groups in Percona Everest RBAC, you would need to set up the groups claim in your IdP provider configuration.

During the SSO authentication, if the group’s scope is requested but the Identity Provider (IdP) lacks the necessary groups claim configuration or does not support it by default, SSO could fail or not function as expected.

> 

Reviewer: I don't think this should be part of the RNs. Maybe this should be in the documentation page and we should say something like "Configure your IdP to provide the user's groups claim by following our [documention](link)"

Author: Fixed
